update!: Add local AI chat recommendations (#2810)
privacyguides/privacyguides.org: docs/ai-chat.md

---
meta_title: "Recommended AI Chat: Private ChatGPT Alternatives - Privacy Guides"

> title: "AI Chat"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Local AI Chat"
```

icon: material/assistant

> description: Unlike OpenAI's ChatGPT and its Big Tech competitors, these AI tools do not train their models using your conversations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Unlike OpenAI's ChatGPT and its Big Tech competitors, these AI tools run locally so your data never leaves your device.
```

cover: ai-chatbots.webp

> global:
>  - [randomize-element, "table tbody"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---
<small>Protects against the following threat(s):</small>

- [:material-server-network: Service Providers](basics/common-threats.md#privacy-from-service-providers){ .pg-teal }
- [:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism](basics/common-threats.md#surveillance-as-a-business-model){ .pg-brown }
- [:material-close-outline: Censorship](basics/common-threats.md#avoiding-censorship){ .pg-blue-gray }

Since the release of ChatGPT in 2022, interactions with Large Language Models (LLMs) have become increasingly common. LLMs can help us write better, understand unfamiliar subjects, or answer a wide range of questions. They can statistically predict the next word based on a vast amount of data scraped from the web.

## Privacy Concerns about LLMs

> Data used to train AI models, however, include a massive amount of _private_ data. Developers of AI software often use [Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback) (RLHF) to improve the quality of LLMs, which entails the possibility of AI companies reading your private AI chats as well as storing them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data used to train AI models, however, include a massive amount of publicly available data scraped from the web. Developers of cloud-based AI software often collect your inputs, meaning your chats are not private from them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.
```

Reviewer 3: Sorry, but that's just and understatement. The

> If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Ai2](https://allenai.org/open-data).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [OLMoE](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe-an-open-small-and-state-of-the-art-mixture-of-experts-model-c258432d0514) made by [Ai2](https://allenai.org/open-data).
```

> If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Allenai](https://allenai.org/open-data).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Ai2](https://allenai.org/open-data).
```

Alternatively, you can run AI models locally so that your data never leaves your device and is therefore never shared with third parties. As such, local models are a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions and allow you to share sensitive information to the AI model without worry.

## Hardware for Local AI Models

> Local models are also fairly accessible as it is possible to run smaller models on modest hardware. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Using more powerful hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory will offer the best experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Local models are also fairly accessible. It's possible to run smaller models at lower speeds on as little as 8GB of RAM. Using more powerful hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory will offer the best experience.
```

> LLMs can usually be differentiated by the number of parameters. The higher the number of parameters, the higher the LLM's capabilities. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed. Models with advanced reasoning capabilities are generally around 70B.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LLMs can usually be differentiated by the number of parameters, which can vary between 1.3B to 405B for open-source models available for end users. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models around 70B have advanced reasoning capabilities. Generally, models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed.
```
@I-I-IT To continue the discussion from https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/2810#discussion_r1842944857, what do you think of this revision?

Reviewer 3: It's good but we should keep "models of 70B ..." at the end cause it make more sense to go in ascending order (we don't want to hype people up about 70B parameters models they probably can't run.

> LLMs can usually be differentiated by the number of parameters, which can vary between 1.3B to 405B. The higher the number of parameters, the higher the LLM's capabilities. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed. Models with advanced reasoning capabilities are generally around 70B.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The higher the number of parameters, the higher the LLM's capabilities. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed. Models with advanced reasoning capabilities are generally around 70B.
```

Reviewer: This doesn't seem to be [true](https://cmte.ieee.org/futuredirections/2023/11/14/llms-hitting-2-trillions-parameters/).

Reviewer 3: If yoh want to be complete, then you should say "LLMs can vary from millions of a parameters to trillions, but models that a consumer-grade can run and are ysefuk are between 6.7B and 80B."

But I am.talkimg about open source models here, sure they are bigger models, but no one can download them.

I am a bit angry cause arguing on such details is pointless, the point of this is NOT to be a science article about LLMs, but rather a brief introduction.

Reviewer: I just want it to be accurate

Reviewer 3: No I understand. But also, I think the broader message is more important than details. So when you say  " The higher the number of parameters, the higher the LLM's capabilities." , this isn't totally true. We have seen in [leaderboards](https://lmarena.ai/) than a 405B model doesn't perform much better than a 70B.

> I don't really think it matters what the minimum and maximum amount of parameters is anyway for the purposes of this page.

It was to give a ballpark of what model size are availables, and which you can actually run.

Reviewer: Well I didn't write that, maybe that should be changed.

Reviewer 2: Yeah that was my bad. It was removed in the latest revision of this part.

To help you choose a model that fits your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks. The most widely-used leaderboard is [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai/), a "Community-driven Evaluation for Best AI chatbots". There is also the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard), which focus on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like MMLU-PRO.  However, there are also specialized benchmarks which measure factors like [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com/), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and many [others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).

### Model Security

> When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama-cli) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you have found an AI model to your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama-cli) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.
```

We recommend downloading model files from Hugging Face, as it provides several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.

To check the authenticity and safety of the model, look for:

- Model cards with clear documentation
- A verified organization badge
- Community reviews and usage statistics
- A "Safe" badge next to the model file (Hugging Face only)
- Matching checksums[^1]

> :   - On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the model file you downloaded.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the model file you downloaded.
```

> A downloaded model is generally safe if they satisfy all of the above checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A downloaded model is generally safe if it satisfies all of the above checks.
```

## AI Chat Clients

> | Local Client | GPU Support | Image Generation | Speech Recognition | Automatically Downloaded Models | Custom Parameters |

Reviewer 3: The problem with this format is that it is mobile-unfriendly, as you have to scroll right to see all the info. Could we either revert it back, or change the format when we detect mobile screen size ?

Reviewer 2: The table's rows and columns were swapped to match how tables are presented elsewhere on the site (VPN, DNS, Search Engines). Also, the randomization logic for tables only applies to rows.

If we revert it to the previous format, then the features would be randomized, which is not that useful. I'm not sure what the original purpose of randomizing the tables was, but the effect it has is that there is no perceived order to the recommended tools, which allows readers to see the places where certain tools shine, and conversely, where the fall short.

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't be opposed to reverting the table format *if* the randomization logic is also changed so that columns are randomized instead. This would make it so you wouldn't have to scroll horizontally, but you'd probably need to scroll vertically instead. I think this is a good idea for the tables which have three or fewer tools for comparison (all but the DNS table).  It would have no effect on the DNS table (or even negative effects due to text wrapping).

Reviewer: I think we also need to make sure the table is in the proper format for accessibility reasons as well. It might just be an unavoidable thing.

Reviewer 3: >The table's rows and columns were swapped to match how tables are presented elsewhere on the site (VPN, DNS, Search Engines). The tables on these pages also have the same "problem" of scrolling that you mentioned. Also, the randomization logic for tables only applies to rows.

I am aware than it is the same format as other table, but just because bad design has been implemented elsewhere, doesn't mean we should stick with it. Isn't there a way to just disable randomisation?

Reviewer 2: I disabled table randomization on this page and reverted the table format: https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/2810/commits/f095b510dcc597c58ccb3a7d13cd1ac5c6683620

> | Local Client | GPU Support | Image Generation | Speech Recognition | Automatically Downloaded Models | Custom Parameters |
> |---|---|---|---|---|---|
> | [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp) | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } |
> | [Ollama](#ollama-cli) | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
> | [Llamafile](#llamafile) | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Few models available | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Feature | [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp) | [Ollama](#ollama-cli) | [Llamafile](#llamafile) |
|---|---|---|---|
| GPU Support | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } |
| Image Generation | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
| Speech Recognition | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
| Auto-download Models | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Few models available |
| Custom Parameters | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } |
| Multi-platform | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Size limitations on Windows |
```

### Kobold.cpp

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Kobold.cpp Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/kobold.png){align=right}

> Kobold.cpp is an AI client that runs locally on your Windows, Mac, or Linux computer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kobold.cpp is an AI client that runs locally on your Windows, Mac, or Linux computer. It is an excellent choice if you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking, such as for role-playing purposes.
```

> In addition to supporting a large range of text models, Kobold.cpp also supports image generators such as [Stable Diffusion](https://stability.ai/stable-image), and automatic speech recognition tools, such as [Whisper](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to supporting a large range of text models, Kobold.cpp also supports image generators such as [Stable Diffusion](https://stability.ai/stable-image) and automatic speech recognition tools such as [Whisper](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp).
```

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/wiki){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/blob/2f3597c29abea8b6da28f21e714b6b24a5aca79b/SECURITY.md){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)

</details>

</div>

<div class="admonition note" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Compatibility Issues</p>

Kobold.cpp might not run on computers without AVX/AVX2 support.

</div>

> Kobold shines best when you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking, such as for roleplaying purposes. It allows you to modify parameters such as the AI model temperature and the AI chat's system prompt. It also supports creating a network tunnel to access AI models from other devices, such as your phone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kobold.cpp allows you to modify parameters such as the AI model temperature and the AI chat's system prompt. It also supports creating a network tunnel to access AI models from other devices such as your phone.
```

> ### Ollama (CLI)

Reviewer 3: I think we could mention that ollama also has GUI community variants.  https://github.com/ollama/ollama?tab=readme-ov-file#web--desktop

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about linking to this since there are so many community *integrations* listed. And some of them are extensions for apps like Discord or VSCode.

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

> ![Ollama Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/ollama.svg){align=right}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![Ollama Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/ollama.png){align=right}
```

> Ollama is a command-line AI assistant that is available on macOS, Linux, and Windows. Ollama is a great choice if you're looking for an AI client that's easy-to-use and widely compatible. It also doesn't involve any manual setup, while still using inference and other techniques to make outputs faster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ollama is a command-line AI assistant that is available on macOS, Linux, and Windows. Ollama is a great choice if you're looking for an AI client that's easy-to-use, widely compatible, and fast due to its use of inference and other techniques. It also doesn't involve any manual setup.
```

In addition to supporting a wide range of text models, Ollama also supports [LLaVA](https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA) models and has experimental support for Meta's [Llama vision capabilities](https://huggingface.co/blog/llama32#what-is-llama-32-vision).

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama#readme){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://ollama.com/download/linux)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://ollama.com/download/mac)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://ollama.com/download/linux)

</details>

</div>

> Ollama simplifies the process of setting up a local AI chat, as it downloads the AI model you want to use automatically. For example, running `ollama run llama3.2` will automatically download and run the Llama 3.2 model. Furthermore, Ollama maintains their own [model library](https://ollama.com/library) where they host the files of various AI models. This ensures models are vetted for both performance and security, eliminating the need to manually verify model authenticity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ollama simplifies the process of setting up a local AI chat, as it downloads the AI model you want to use automatically. For example, running `ollama run llama3.2` will automatically download and run the Llama 3.2 model. Furthermore, Ollama maintains their own [model library](https://ollama.com/library) where they host the files of various AI models. This ensures that models are vetted for both performance and security, eliminating the need to manually verify model authenticity.
```

### Llamafile

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Llamafile Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/llamafile.svg){align=right}

Llamafile is a lightweight single-file executable that allows users to run large language models locally on their own computers without any setup involved. It is [backed by Mozilla](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2023/11/introducing-llamafile) and available on Linux, macOS, and Windows.

Llamafile also supports LLaVA. However, it does not support speech recognition or image generation.

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

> [:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile/?tab=readme-ov-file#llamafile){ .card-link title="Documentation" }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#llamafile){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
```

[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#security){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-solid-desktop: Desktop](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#quickstart)

</details>

</div>

> Mozilla has made llamafiles available for only some Llama and Mistral models, while there are few third-party llamafiles available.
> 
> If you use Llamafile on Windows, be aware that Windows limits `.exe` files to 4GB, and most models are larger than that. To work around this restriction, you can [load external weights](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#using-llamafile-with-external-weights).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mozilla has made llamafiles available for only some Llama and Mistral models, while there are few third-party llamafiles available. Moreover, Windows limits `.exe` files to 4GB, and most models are larger than that.

To circumvent these issues, you can [load external weights](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#using-llamafile-with-external-weights).
```

---
meta_title: "Recommended AI Chat: Private ChatGPT Alternatives - Privacy Guides"
title: "AI Chat"
icon: material/assistant
description: Unlike OpenAI's ChatGPT and its Big Tech competitors, these AI tools do not train their models using your conversations.
cover: ai-chatbots.webp
---
<small>Protects against the following threat(s):</small>

- [:material-server-network: Service Providers](basics/common-threats.md#privacy-from-service-providers){ .pg-teal }
- [:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism](basics/common-threats.md#surveillance-as-a-business-model){ .pg-brown }
- [:material-close-outline: Censorship](basics/common-threats.md#avoiding-censorship){ .pg-blue-gray }

Since the release of ChatGPT in 2022, interactions with Large Language Models (LLMs) have become increasingly common. LLMs can help us write better, understand unfamiliar subjects, or answer a wide range of questions. They can statistically predict the next word based on a vast amount of data scraped from the web.

> ## Privacy Concerns about LLMs

Author: What do we think about moving this section and the hardware section to be at the bottom (in between the AI Chat Clients section and the Criteria section) instead?

Reviewer 3: This wouldnt make sense. If you don't think explaining LLMs is needed, then it's better to just not include it.

And the hardware section obv. need to be before AI clients cause it is so.people know wich AI models they can download.

Author: Hm. I guess my question is, do you need to choose a model before you choose a client? It feels like this heading order would make just as much sense:

1. Privacy Concerns about LLMs
1. AI Chat Clients
2. Hardware for Local AI Models
3. AI Models
   a. Find and Choose a Model
   b. Model Security

Actually, maybe we'd even do:

1. Privacy Concerns about LLMs
2. AI Chat Clients
3. AI Models
   a. Hardware Requirements
   b. Choosing a Model
   c. Model Security

Reviewer 3: For Llamafile, you directly download a model, so not explaining which model is your machine capable of running will be odd.

But we could do
1.Privacy Concerns about LLMS
2.AI models
a. Hardware requirements
b. Choosing a model
3.AI clients
(explain how to use models with Llamafile & Ollama)
4.Download models
"If you use Kobold or want AI models not in your AI client Library, follow those steps" :
(Explain how to download&securely do so)

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/2810/commits/71f638a2a6383d7d8da3f6a7d5cf004ef325f480 I rearranged the headings based on your suggestion, @I-I-IT. Feel free to suggest additional explanations or other changes!

> Data used to train AI models, however, includes a massive amount of publicly available data scraped from the web, which can include sensitive information like names and addresses. Cloud-based AI software often [collects your inputs](https://openai.com/policies/row-privacy-policy/), meaning your chats are not private from them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data used to train AI models, however, includes a massive amount of publicly available data scraped from the web, which can include sensitive information like names and addresses. Cloud-based AI software often [collects your inputs](https://openai.com/policies/row-privacy-policy), meaning your chats are not private from them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.
```

> Data used to train AI models, however, include a massive amount of publicly available data scraped from the web, which can include sensitive information like names and addresses. Developers of cloud-based AI software often [collect your inputs](https://openai.com/policies/row-privacy-policy/), meaning your chats are not private from them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data used to train AI models, however, includes a massive amount of publicly available data scraped from the web, which can include sensitive information like names and addresses. Cloud-based AI software often [collects your inputs](https://openai.com/policies/row-privacy-policy/), meaning your chats are not private from them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.
```

If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [OLMoE](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe-an-open-small-and-state-of-the-art-mixture-of-experts-model-c258432d0514) made by [Ai2](https://allenai.org/open-data).

Alternatively, you can run AI models locally so that your data never leaves your device and is therefore never shared with third parties. As such, local models are a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions and allow you to share sensitive information to the AI model without worry.

## Hardware for Local AI Models

> Local models are also fairly accessible. It's possible to run smaller models at lower speeds on as little as 8GB of RAM. Using more powerful hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory will offer the best experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Local models are also fairly accessible. It's possible to run smaller models at lower speeds on as little as 8GB of RAM. Using more powerful hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory offers the best experience.
```

LLMs can usually be differentiated by the number of parameters, which can vary between 1.3B to 405B for open-source models available for end users. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed. Models with advanced reasoning capabilities are generally around 70B.

For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance. Check out the table below for more precise information about the typical requirements for different sizes of quantized models.

| Model Size (in Parameters) | Minimum RAM | Minimum Processor |
|---|---|---|
| 7B | 8GB | Modern CPU (AVX2 support) |
| 13B | 16GB | Modern CPU (AVX2 support) |
| 70B | 72GB | GPU with VRAM |

To run AI locally, you need both an AI model and an AI client.

### Choosing a Model

> There are many permissively licensed models available to download. **[Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models)** is a platform that lets you browse, research, and download models in common formats like [GGUF](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/gguf). Companies that provide good open-weights models include big names like Mistral, Meta, Microsoft, and Google. However, there are also many community models and 'fine-tunes' available. As mentioned above, quantized models offer the best balance between model quality and performance for those using consumer-grade hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many permissively licensed models available to download. [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models) is a platform that lets you browse, research, and download models in common formats like [GGUF](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/en/gguf). Companies that provide good open-weights models include big names like Mistral, Meta, Microsoft, and Google. However, there are also many community models and 'fine-tunes' available. As mentioned above, quantized models offer the best balance between model quality and performance for those using consumer-grade hardware.
```

> To help you choose a model that fits your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks, of which there are many kinds. The most widely-used leaderboard is the community-driven [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai). Additionally, the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard) focuses on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like [MMLU-Pro](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01574).  Furthermore, there are also specialized benchmarks which measure factors like [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and [many others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To help you choose a model that fits your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks. The most widely-used leaderboard is the community-driven [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai). Additionally, the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard) focuses on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like [MMLU-Pro](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.01574).  There are also specialized benchmarks which measure factors like [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and [many others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).
```

## AI Chat Clients

| Feature | [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp) | [Ollama](#ollama-cli) | [Llamafile](#llamafile) |
|---|---|---|---|
| GPU Support | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } |
| Image Generation | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
| Speech Recognition | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
| Auto-download Models | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Few models available |

> | Custom Parameters | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Custom Parameters | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } |
```

Reviewer 3: I checked and they indeed allow you to very easily change your "settings" 
![llamafile-screenshot](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3714f6fa-f5d6-4325-91df-b4de6d2695a5)

| Multi-platform | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Size limitations on Windows |

### Kobold.cpp

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Kobold.cpp Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/kobold.png){align=right}

> Kobold.cpp is an AI client that runs locally on your Windows, Mac, or Linux computer. It is an excellent choice if you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking, such as for role-playing purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kobold.cpp is an AI client that runs locally on your Windows, Mac, or Linux computer. It's an excellent choice if you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking, such as for role-playing purposes.
```

Kobold.cpp might not run on computers without AVX/AVX2 support.

</div>

Kobold.cpp allows you to modify parameters such as the AI model temperature and the AI chat's system prompt. It also supports creating a network tunnel to access AI models from other devices such as your phone.

### Ollama (CLI)

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Ollama Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/ollama.png){align=right}

Ollama is a command-line AI assistant that is available on macOS, Linux, and Windows. Ollama is a great choice if you're looking for an AI client that's easy-to-use, widely compatible, and fast due to its use of inference and other techniques. It also doesn't involve any manual setup.

In addition to supporting a wide range of text models, Ollama also supports [LLaVA](https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA) models and has experimental support for Meta's [Llama vision capabilities](https://huggingface.co/blog/llama32#what-is-llama-32-vision).

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama#readme){ .card-link title="Documentation" }

> [:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama/blob/a14f76491d694b2f5a0dec6473514b7f93beeea0/SECURITY.md){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }
```

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

> - [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://ollama.com/download/linux)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://ollama.com/download/windows)
```

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://ollama.com/download/windows)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://ollama.com/download/mac)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://ollama.com/download/linux)

</details>

</div>

> Ollama simplifies the process of setting up a local AI chat, as it downloads the AI model you want to use automatically. For example, running `ollama run llama3.2` will automatically download and run the Llama 3.2 model. Furthermore, Ollama maintains their own [model library](https://ollama.com/library) where they host the files of various AI models. This ensures that models are vetted for both performance and security, eliminating the need to manually verify model authenticity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ollama simplifies the process of setting up a local AI chat by downloading the AI model you want to use automatically. For example, running `ollama run llama3.2` will automatically download and run the Llama 3.2 model. Furthermore, Ollama maintains their own [model library](https://ollama.com/library) where they host the files of various AI models. This ensures that models are vetted for both performance and security, eliminating the need to manually verify model authenticity.
```

### Llamafile

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Llamafile Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/llamafile.svg){align=right}

> Llamafile is a lightweight single-file executable that allows users to run large language models locally on their own computers without any setup involved. It is [backed by Mozilla](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2023/11/introducing-llamafile) and available on Linux, macOS, and Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Llamafile is a lightweight single-file executable that allows users to run LLMs locally on their own computers without any setup involved. It is [backed by Mozilla](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2023/11/introducing-llamafile) and available on Linux, macOS, and Windows.
```

> Llamafile also supports LLaVA. However, it does not support speech recognition or image generation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Llamafile also supports LLaVA. However, it doesn't support speech recognition or image generation.
```

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#llamafile){ .card-link title="Documentation" }

> [:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
```

[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#security){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-solid-desktop: Desktop](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#quickstart)

</details>

</div>

Mozilla has made llamafiles available for only some Llama and Mistral models, while there are few third-party llamafiles available. Moreover, Windows limits `.exe` files to 4GB, and most models are larger than that.

To circumvent these issues, you can [load external weights](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#using-llamafile-with-external-weights).

## Securely Downloading Models

If you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama-cli) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.

> We recommend downloading model files from Hugging Face, as it provides several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend downloading model files from Hugging Face since it provides several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.
```

To check the authenticity and safety of the model, look for:

- Model cards with clear documentation
- A verified organization badge
- Community reviews and usage statistics
- A "Safe" badge next to the model file (Hugging Face only)
- Matching checksums[^1]
    - On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the model file you downloaded.

A downloaded model is generally safe if it satisfies all of the above checks.

## Criteria

Please note we are not affiliated with any of the projects we recommend. In addition to [our standard criteria](about/criteria.md), we have developed a clear set of requirements to allow us to provide objective recommendations. We suggest you familiarize yourself with this list before choosing to use a project and conduct your own research to ensure it's the right choice for you.

### Minimum Requirements

- Must be open-source.

> - Must not send personal data, including chat data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Must not transmit personal data, including chat data.
```

---
meta_title: "Recommended AI Chat: Private ChatGPT Alternatives - Privacy Guides"
title: "AI Chat"
icon: material/assistant
description: Unlike OpenAI's ChatGPT and its Big Tech competitors, these AI tools do not train their models using your conversations.
cover: ai-chatbots.webp
---
<small>Protects against the following threat(s):</small>

- [:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism](basics/common-threats.md#surveillance-as-a-business-model){ .pg-brown }

> - [:material-close-outline: Censorship](basics/common-threats.md#avoiding-censorship){ .pg-blue-gray }

Author: Does it? (Especially this last one, what is the censorship connection here?)

Reviewer 3: Maybe this need some explanation somewhere. Basically, it is useful for anti-censorship for a couple reasons:
1) Offline "data-base" : if your access to a Free internet is cut off, you can have access to world knowledge with just an offline chatbot.
2)"Ghosting" information: nowadays, some 'democratic' countries like India, have tool to order *worldwide* deletion of certain content. But with an AI chat-bot, you have more difficulty suppressing this information.
3)Using local AI models has less censorship because you can modify the system prompt.

Author: I see, I suppose that's fair enough.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<small>Protects against the following threat(s):</small>

- [:material-server-network: Service Providers](basics/common-threats.md#privacy-from-service-providers){ .pg-teal }
- [:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism](basics/common-threats.md#surveillance-as-a-business-model){ .pg-brown }
- [:material-close-outline: Censorship](basics/common-threats.md#avoiding-censorship){ .pg-blue-gray }
```
As with the other tools that are meant for local/on-device use, I'm adding the service providers label here.

Since the release of ChatGPT in 2022, interactions with Large Language Models (LLMs) have become increasingly common. LLMs can help us write better, understand unfamiliar subjects, or answer a wide range of questions. Based on a vast amount of data scraped from the web, they can statistically predict the next word.

However, to improve the quality of LLMs, developers of AI software often use [Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback) (RLHF). This entails the possibility of AI companies reading your private AI chats as well as storing them, which introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users. To solve these problems, you can use trusted and privacy-focused providers or run AI models locally so your data never leaves your device.

<details class="admonition info" markdown>
<summary>Ethical and Privacy Concerns about LLMs</summary>

> AI models have been trained on massive amounts of public *and* private data. If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai), which publicly release their training datasets and therefore weren't trained on private data. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Allenai](https://allenai.org/open-data).

Author: ```suggestion
AI models have been trained on massive amounts of public *and* private data. If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Allenai](https://allenai.org/open-data).
```

The conclusion drawn after "therefore" I don't think is necessarily inherent to open source models. Like, an open source model _could_ have private/crawled datasets right?

Reviewer 3: It could defintely have semi-private data like "Your 3AM post on your one subscriber Twitter account".

> [Ethical concerns](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/landig/article/PIIS2588-7500(24)00061-X/fulltext) about AI range from their impact on climate to their potential for discrimination.

Author: @redoomed1:

> The journal doesn't show on the page of the provided link.

https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/2525#discussion_r1837474597

Reviewer 3: We can replace with another link, and I provided it in my comment here https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/2810#issuecomment-2471239940

<details class="admonition info" markdown>
<summary>Hardware Requirements for Local Models</summary>

Here are typical requirements for different model sizes:

- 7B parameter models: 8GB RAM minimum, 16GB recommended
- 13B parameter models: 16GB RAM minimum, 32GB recommended
- 70B parameter models: Dedicated GPU with 24GB+ VRAM recommended
- Quantized models (4-bit): Can run with roughly half these requirements

</details>

**To run AI locally, you need both an AI client and an AI model**.

## Downloading AI models

There are many permissively licensed **models available to download**. **[Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models?library=gguf)** is a platform that lets you browse, research, and download models in common formats like GGUF. Companies that provide good open-weights models include big names like Mistral, Meta, Microsoft, and Google. But there are also many community models and 'fine-tunes' available. For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance.

> To help you choose a model that fit your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks. The most widely-used leaderboard is [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai/), a "Community-driven Evaluation for Best AI chatbots". There is also the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard), which focus on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like MMLU-PRO.  However, there are also specialed benchmarks, that for example measure [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com/), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and many [others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).

Author: ```suggestion

To help you choose a model that fits your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks. The most widely-used leaderboard is [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai/), a "Community-driven Evaluation for Best AI chatbots". There is also the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard), which focus on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like MMLU-PRO.  However, there are also specialized benchmarks which measure factors like [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com/), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and many [others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).
```

![Kobold.cpp Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/kobold.png){align=right}

Kobold.cpp is an AI client that runs locally on your Windows, Mac, or Linux computer.

In addition to supporting a large range of text models, Kobold.cpp also supports image generators such as [Stable Diffusion](https://stability.ai/stable-image), and automatic speech recognition tools, such as [Whisper](https://github.com/ggerganov/whisper.cpp).

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/wiki){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/blob/2f3597c29abea8b6da28f21e714b6b24a5aca79b/SECURITY.md){ .card-link title="Security Policy"}

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)

</details>

</div>

> Kobold shines best when you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking, such as for roleplaying purposes. It allows you to modify parameters such as the AI model temperature and the AI chat's system prompt. It also supports creating a network tunnel to access AI models from other devices, such as your phone.

Author: ```suggestion
Kobold is best if you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking. It allows you to modify parameters such as the AI model temperature and the AI chat's system prompt. It also supports creating a network tunnel to access AI models from other devices, such as your phone.
```

Not sure if we need to mention roleplaying or other specific use-cases. Can we have an explanation of what temperature is?

Reviewer 3: The temperature is defined in abreviations (it change the model creativity/randomness). We could explicitely define it, but it isn't recommended to change it, except for specifi use cases such as roleplaying (where you don't want your model to write a story about a princess every time...)

I think it is useful to mention use-cases to help user choose the ai client that best fit their needs.

<div class="admonition note" markdown>

> <p class="admonition-title">Compatibility Issues</p>
> Kobold.cpp might not run on computers without AVX/AVX2 support.
> </div>

Author: ```suggestion
<p class="admonition-title">Compatibility Issues</p>

Kobold.cpp might not run on computers without AVX/AVX2 support.

</div>
```

### Ollama

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Ollama Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/ollama.svg){align=right}

Ollama is an easy-to-use command-line AI assistant that is available on macOS, Linux, and Windows.

In addition to supporting a wide range of text models, Ollama also supports [LLaVA](https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA) models and has *experimental* support for Meta's [Llama vision capabilities](https://huggingface.co/blog/llama32#what-is-llama-32-vision).

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code"}

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://ollama.com/download/linux)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://ollama.com/download/mac)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://ollama.com/download/linux)

</details>

</div>

> Ollama shines best when you're looking for an AI client that has great compatibility and ease of use. It runs on all desktop platforms and doesn't involve any manual setup, while still using inference and other techniques to make outputs faster.

Author: ```suggestion
Ollama is best if you're looking for an AI client that has great compatibility and ease of use. It runs on all desktop platforms and doesn't involve any manual setup, while still using inference and other techniques to make outputs faster.
```

### Llamafile

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Llamafile Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/llamafile.svg){align=right}

> Llamafile is a single-file executable that allows users to run large language models locally on their own computers, without any setup involved. It is available on Linux, macOS, and Windows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Llamafile is a lightweight single-file executable that allows users to run large language models locally on their own computers without any setup involved. It is [backed by Mozilla](https://hacks.mozilla.org/2023/11/introducing-llamafile) and available on Linux, macOS, and Windows.
```

![Llamafile Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/llamafile.svg){align=right}

Llamafile is a single-file executable that allows users to run large language models locally on their own computers, without any setup involved. It is available on Linux, macOS, and Windows.

The Mozilla-run project also supports LLaVA. However, it does not support speech recognition or image generation. It's also very lightweight and compatible.

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile/){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile/?tab=readme-ov-file#llamafile){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile?tab=readme-ov-file#security){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }

> <details class="downloads" markdown>

Author: ```suggestion

<details class="downloads" markdown>
```

> The Mozilla-run project also supports LLaVA. However, it does not support speech recognition or image generation. It's also very lightweight and compatible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Llamafile also supports LLaVA. However, it does not support speech recognition or image generation.
```

> [:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile/){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile){ .md-button .md-button--primary }
```

> When you have found an AI model to your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. If you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama-cli) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there.
> 
> However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama-cli) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.
```

> [:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile?tab=readme-ov-file#security){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/Mozilla-Ocho/llamafile#security){ .card-link title="Security Policy" }
```

</div>

## Criteria

Please note we are not affiliated with any of the projects we recommend. In addition to [our standard criteria](about/criteria.md), we have developed a clear set of requirements to allow us to provide objective recommendations. We suggest you familiarize yourself with this list before choosing to use a project and conduct your own research to ensure it's the right choice for you.

### Minimum Requirements

- Must be open-source.
- Must not send personal data, including chat data.
- Must be available on Linux.
- Must not require a GPU.
- Must have support for GPU-powered fast inference.
- Must not require an internet connection.

### Best-Case

Our best-case criteria represent what we *would* like to see from the perfect project in this category. Our recommendations may not include any or all of this functionality, but those which do may rank higher than others on this page.

- Should be multi-platform.

> - Should be easy to download and set up, such as having a one-click install process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Should be easy to download and set up, e.g. with a one-click install process.
```

- Should have a built-in model downloader option.

> - Should be customizable (the user can modify the LLM paramaters, such as its system prompt or its temperature).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The user should be able to modify the LLM parameters, such as its system prompt or temperature.
```

Alternatively, you can run AI models locally as a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions, as your data never leaves your device and is therefore never shared with third parties. This also allows you to share sensitive information to the local model without worry.

## Hardware for Local AI Models

Local models are also fairly accessible as it is possible to run smaller models on modest hardware. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Using more powerful hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory will offer the best experience.

LLMs can usually be differentiated by the number of parameters, which can vary between 1.3B to 405B. The higher the number of parameters, the higher the LLM's capabilities. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed. Models with advanced reasoning capabilities are generally around 70B.

> For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance. Check out the list below for more precise information about the typical requirements for different sizes of quantized models.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance. Check out the table below for more precise information about the typical requirements for different sizes of quantized models.
```

| Model Size (in Parameters) | Minimum RAM | Minimum Processor |
|---|---|---|
| 7B | 8GB | Modern CPU (AVX2 support) |
| 13B | 16GB | Modern CPU (AVX2 support) |
| 70B | 72GB | GPU with VRAM |

To run AI locally, you need both an AI model and an AI client.

## AI Models

### Find and Choose a Model

> There are many permissively licensed **models available to download**. **[Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models?library=gguf)** is a platform that lets you browse, research, and download models in common formats like GGUF. Companies that provide good open-weights models include big names like Mistral, Meta, Microsoft, and Google. But there are also many community models and 'fine-tunes' available. For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many permissively licensed models available to download. **[Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/models?library=gguf)** is a platform that lets you browse, research, and download models in common formats like GGUF. Companies that provide good open-weights models include big names like Mistral, Meta, Microsoft, and Google. But there are also many community models and 'fine-tunes' available. For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance.
```

To help you choose a model that fits your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks. The most widely-used leaderboard is [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai/), a "Community-driven Evaluation for Best AI chatbots". There is also the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard), which focus on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like MMLU-PRO.  However, there are also specialized benchmarks which measure factors like [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com/), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and many [others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).

### Model Security

> When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama-cli) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. However, if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp)), you will need to take extra steps to ensure that the AI model you download is safe and legitimate.
```

We recommend downloading model files from Hugging Face, as it provides several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.

To check the authenticity and safety of the model, look for:

- Model cards with clear documentation
- A verified organization badge
- Community reviews and usage statistics
- A "Safe" badge next to the model file (Hugging Face only)
- Matching checksums[^1]
  - On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the model file you downloaded.

A downloaded model is generally safe if they satisfy all of the above checks.

> ## AI chat clients

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## AI Chat Clients
```

| Local Client | GPU Support | Image Generation | Speech Recognition | Automatically Downloaded Models | Custom Parameters |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp) | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } |

> | [Ollama](#ollama) | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [Ollama](#ollama-cli) | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
```

[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/wiki){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
[:octicons-lock-16:](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/blob/2f3597c29abea8b6da28f21e714b6b24a5aca79b/SECURITY.md){ .card-link title="Security Policy"}

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://github.com/LostRuins/koboldcpp/releases)

</details>

</div>

Kobold shines best when you are looking for heavy customization and tweaking, such as for roleplaying purposes. It allows you to modify parameters such as the AI model temperature and the AI chat's system prompt. It also supports creating a network tunnel to access AI models from other devices, such as your phone.

<div class="admonition note" markdown>
<p class="admonition-title">Compatibility Issues</p>

Kobold.cpp might not run on computers without AVX/AVX2 support.

</div>

> ### Ollama

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Ollama (CLI)
```

<div class="admonition recommendation" markdown>

![Ollama Logo](assets/img/ai-chat/ollama.svg){align=right}

> Ollama is an easy-to-use command-line AI assistant that is available on macOS, Linux, and Windows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ollama is a command-line AI assistant that is available on macOS, Linux, and Windows. Ollama is a great choice if you're looking for an AI client that's easy-to-use and widely compatible. It also doesn't involve any manual setup, while still using inference and other techniques to make outputs faster.
```

> In addition to supporting a wide range of text models, Ollama also supports [LLaVA](https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA) models and has *experimental* support for Meta's [Llama vision capabilities](https://huggingface.co/blog/llama32#what-is-llama-32-vision).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to supporting a wide range of text models, Ollama also supports [LLaVA](https://github.com/haotian-liu/LLaVA) models and has experimental support for Meta's [Llama vision capabilities](https://huggingface.co/blog/llama32#what-is-llama-32-vision).
```

[:octicons-home-16: Homepage](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .md-button .md-button--primary }

> [:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
> [:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code"}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[:octicons-info-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama#readme){ .card-link title="Documentation" }
[:octicons-code-16:](https://github.com/ollama/ollama){ .card-link title="Source Code" }
```

<details class="downloads" markdown>
<summary>Downloads</summary>

- [:fontawesome-brands-windows: Windows](https://ollama.com/download/linux)
- [:simple-apple: macOS](https://ollama.com/download/mac)
- [:simple-linux: Linux](https://ollama.com/download/linux)

</details>

</div>

> Ollama is best if you're looking for an AI client that has great compatibility and ease of use. It runs on all desktop platforms and doesn't involve any manual setup, while still using inference and other techniques to make outputs faster.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> It also simplifies the process of setting up a local AI chat, as it downloads the AI model you want to use automatically. For example, running `ollama run llama3.2` will automatically download and run the Llama 3.2 model. Furthermore, ollama maintains their own [model library](https://ollama.com/library/) where they host the files of various AI models. This ensures models are vetted for both performance and security, eliminating the need to manually verify model authenticity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ollama simplifies the process of setting up a local AI chat, as it downloads the AI model you want to use automatically. For example, running `ollama run llama3.2` will automatically download and run the Llama 3.2 model. Furthermore, Ollama maintains their own [model library](https://ollama.com/library) where they host the files of various AI models. This ensures models are vetted for both performance and security, eliminating the need to manually verify model authenticity.
```

</details>

**Running AI models locally** offers a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions, as **your data never leaves your device** and is therefore never shared with third-party providers. This provides peace of mind and **allows you to share sensitive information**.

For the best experience, a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory is recommended. Fortunately, it is possible to run smaller models locally even without a high-end computer or dedicated GPU. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Below is a table with more precise information :

<details class="admonition info" markdown>
<summary>Hardware Requirements for Local Models</summary>

Here are typical requirements for different model sizes:

- 7B parameter models: 8GB RAM minimum, 16GB recommended
- 13B parameter models: 16GB RAM minimum, 32GB recommended
- 70B parameter models: Dedicated GPU with 24GB+ VRAM recommended
- Quantized models (4-bit): Can run with roughly half these requirements

> </details>

Reviewer 3: This is about choosing models -not clients- so it doesn't belong in the client part.This is not recommending hardware, merely informing users what models their system is capable of running.

> For the best experience, a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory is recommended. Fortunately, it is possible to run smaller models locally even without a high-end computer or dedicated GPU. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Below is a table with more precise information :
> 
> <details class="admonition info" markdown>
> <summary>Hardware Requirements for Local Models</summary>
> 
> Here are typical requirements for different model sizes:
> 
> - 7B parameter models: 8GB RAM minimum, 16GB recommended
> - 13B parameter models: 16GB RAM minimum, 32GB recommended
> - 70B parameter models: Dedicated GPU with 24GB+ VRAM recommended
> - Quantized models (4-bit): Can run with roughly half these requirements
> 
> </details>

Reviewer 2: Ah, thanks for the clarification. I think my issue here is that this excerpt starts out with a recommendation of a type of RAM. Perhaps its better to invert the order in which the paragraph is presented.

```suggestion
Local models are also fairly accessible as it is possible to run smaller models on modest hardware. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Using beefier hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory will offer the best experience. Below is a table with more precise information :

<details class="admonition info" markdown>
<summary>Hardware Requirements for Local Models</summary>

Here are typical requirements for different model sizes:

- 7B parameter models: 8GB RAM minimum, 16GB recommended
- 13B parameter models: 16GB RAM minimum, 32GB recommended
- 70B parameter models: Dedicated GPU with 24GB+ VRAM recommended
- Quantized models (4-bit): Can run with roughly half these requirements

</details>
```
Also, to follow up on Jonah's observation of admonition overuse, the hardware requirements can probably do without the admonition and just be a 3x4 table.

> </details>

Reviewer 3: Seem right. Yup we can just do a table now that we have split local and cloud providers

> </details>

Reviewer 2: On second thought, this info can be kept as a list since I added randomization for the tables on this page (for the local clients table). Randomizing this info is not ideal IMO.

> </details>

Author: We can figure out a way to only randomize a specific table too, if we prefer? I don't remember how the random JS works but we can easily modify it if it doesn't support that.

> </details>

Reviewer 3: Tables are only randomised if you put some randomise flag like on VPN page.

> For the best experience, a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory is recommended. Fortunately, it is possible to run smaller models locally even without a high-end computer or dedicated GPU. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Below is a table with more precise information :
> 
> <details class="admonition info" markdown>
> <summary>Hardware Requirements for Local Models</summary>
> 
> Here are typical requirements for different model sizes:
> 
> - 7B parameter models: 8GB RAM minimum, 16GB recommended
> - 13B parameter models: 16GB RAM minimum, 32GB recommended
> - 70B parameter models: Dedicated GPU with 24GB+ VRAM recommended
> - Quantized models (4-bit): Can run with roughly half these requirements
> 
> </details>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Hardware for Local AI Models

Local models are also fairly accessible as it is possible to run smaller models on modest hardware. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Using more powerful hardware such as a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory will offer the best experience.

LLMs can usually be differentiated by the number of parameters, which can vary between 1.3B to 405B. The higher the number of parameters, the higher the LLM's capabilities. For example, models below 6.7B parameters are only good for basic tasks like text summaries, while models between 7B and 13B are a great compromise between quality and speed. Models with advanced reasoning capabilities are generally around 70B.

For consumer-grade hardware, it is generally recommended to use [quantized models](https://huggingface.co/docs/optimum/en/concept_guides/quantization) for the best balance between model quality and performance. Check out the list below for more precise information about the typical requirements for different sizes of quantized models.

| Model Size (in Parameters) | Minimum RAM | Minimum Processor |
|---|---|---|
| 7B | 8GB | Modern CPU (AVX2 support) |
| 13B | 16GB | Modern CPU (AVX2 support) |
| 70B | 72GB | GPU with VRAM |
```
Latest suggestion based on @I-I-IT's provided changes (I condensed some things and added some explanatory sentences based on what I inferred from reading)

Please let me know if anything in it needs to be corrected.

---
meta_title: "Recommended AI Chat: Private ChatGPT Alternatives - Privacy Guides"
title: "AI Chat"
icon: material/assistant
description: Unlike OpenAI's ChatGPT and its Big Tech competitors, these AI tools do not train their models using your conversations.

> cover: ai-chatbots.webp

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
cover: ai-chatbots.webp
global:
 - [randomize-element, "table tbody"]
```
Randomizes the table for the local clients; might need to swap the columns and rows

## Privacy Concerns about LLMs

Data used to train AI models, however, include a massive amount of _private_ data. Developers of AI software often use [Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback) (RLHF) to improve the quality of LLMs, which entails the possibility of AI companies reading your private AI chats as well as storing them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.

If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Allenai](https://allenai.org/open-data).

> Alternatively, you can run AI models locally so your data never leaves your device.
> 
> AI models that are run locally offer a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions, as your data never leaves your device and is therefore never shared with third-party providers. This provides peace of mind and allows you to share sensitive information to the local model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can run AI models locally as a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions, as your data never leaves your device and is therefore never shared with third parties. This provides peace of mind and allows you to share sensitive information to the local model.
```
Deduplication

---
meta_title: "Recommended AI Chat: Private ChatGPT Alternatives - Privacy Guides"
title: "AI Chat"
icon: material/assistant
description: Unlike OpenAI's ChatGPT and its Big Tech competitors, these AI tools do not train their models using your conversations.
cover: ai-chatbots.webp
global:
 - [randomize-element, "table tbody"]
---
<small>Protects against the following threat(s):</small>

- [:material-account-cash: Surveillance Capitalism](basics/common-threats.md#surveillance-as-a-business-model){ .pg-brown }
- [:material-close-outline: Censorship](basics/common-threats.md#avoiding-censorship){ .pg-blue-gray }

> Since the release of ChatGPT in 2022, interactions with Large Language Models (LLMs) have become increasingly common. LLMs can help us write better, understand unfamiliar subjects, or answer a wide range of questions. Based on a vast amount of data scraped from the web, they can statistically predict the next word.
> 
> However, to improve the quality of LLMs, developers of AI software often use [Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback) (RLHF). This entails the possibility of AI companies reading your private AI chats as well as storing them, which introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users. To solve these problems, you can use trusted and privacy-focused providers or run AI models locally so your data never leaves your device.
> 
> <details class="admonition info" markdown>
> <summary>Ethical and Privacy Concerns about LLMs</summary>
> 
> AI models have been trained on massive amounts of public *and* private data. If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Allenai](https://allenai.org/open-data).
> 
> [Ethical concerns](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/landig/article/PIIS2588-7500(24)00061-X/fulltext) about AI range from their impact on climate to their potential for discrimination.
> 
> </details>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the release of ChatGPT in 2022, interactions with Large Language Models (LLMs) have become increasingly common. LLMs can help us write better, understand unfamiliar subjects, or answer a wide range of questions. They can statistically predict the next word based on a vast amount of data scraped from the web.

## Ethical and Privacy Concerns about LLMs

Data used to train AI models, however, include a massive amount of _private_ data. Developers of AI software often use [Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reinforcement_learning_from_human_feedback) (RLHF) to improve the quality of LLMs, which entails the possibility of AI companies reading your private AI chats as well as storing them. This practice also introduces a risk of data breaches. Furthermore, there is a real possibility that an LLM will leak your private chat information in future conversations with other users.

The popularity of LLMs after the release of ChatGPT has sparked widespread discussion about [ethical concerns](https://www.thelancet.com/journals/landig/article/PIIS2588-7500(24)00061-X/fulltext) surrounding the technology. These range from their impact on climate to their potential for discrimination.

If you are concerned about these practices, you can either refuse to use AI, or use [truly open-source models](https://proton.me/blog/how-to-build-privacy-first-ai) which publicly release and allow you to inspect their training datasets. One such model is [Olmoe](https://allenai.org/blog/olmoe) made by [Allenai](https://allenai.org/open-data).

Alternatively, you can run AI models locally so your data never leaves your device.
```

AI models that are run locally offer a more private and secure alternative to cloud-based solutions, as your data never leaves your device and is therefore never shared with third-party providers. This provides peace of mind and allows you to share sensitive information to the local model.

For the best experience, a dedicated GPU with sufficient VRAM or a modern system with fast LPDDR5X memory is recommended. Fortunately, it is possible to run smaller models locally even without a high-end computer or dedicated GPU. A computer with at least 8GB of RAM will be sufficient to run smaller models at lower speeds. Below is a table with more precise information :

<details class="admonition info" markdown>
<summary>Hardware Requirements for Local Models</summary>

Here are typical requirements for different model sizes:

- 7B parameter models: 8GB RAM minimum, 16GB recommended
- 13B parameter models: 16GB RAM minimum, 32GB recommended
- 70B parameter models: Dedicated GPU with 24GB+ VRAM recommended
- Quantized models (4-bit): Can run with roughly half these requirements

</details>

> To run AI locally, you need both an AI client and an AI model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To run AI locally, you need both an AI model and an AI client.
```
Swapping order to reflect the order of sections

> ## Downloading AI models

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## AI Models

### Find and Choose a Model
```

To help you choose a model that fits your needs, you can look at leaderboards and benchmarks. The most widely-used leaderboard is [LM Arena](https://lmarena.ai/), a "Community-driven Evaluation for Best AI chatbots". There is also the [OpenLLM Leaderboard](https://huggingface.co/spaces/open-llm-leaderboard/open_llm_leaderboard), which focus on the performance of open-weights models on common benchmarks like MMLU-PRO.  However, there are also specialized benchmarks which measure factors like [emotional intelligence](https://eqbench.com/), ["uncensored general intelligence"](https://huggingface.co/spaces/DontPlanToEnd/UGI-Leaderboard), and many [others](https://www.nebuly.com/blog/llm-leaderboards).

> <details class="admonition warning" markdown>
> <summary>Model Security and Verification</summary>
> 
> When downloading AI models, especially from Hugging Face, it's important to verify their authenticity. Look for:
> 
> - Model cards with clear documentation
> - Verified organization badge
> - Community reviews and usage statistics
> - **When available**, verify the file checksum (a type of anti-tampering fingerprint).  On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by:
> 
>     1. Clicking on a model file
>     2. Looking for "Copy SHA256" button below the file
>     3. Comparing this hash with the one you get after downloading (using tools like `sha256sum` on Linux/macOS or `certutil -hashfile file SHA256` on Windows)
> 
> Those steps help ensure you're not downloading potentially malicious models.
> 
> </details>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Model Security

When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. If you want to download other models, or use an AI client without their library, you should follow their official documentation.

We advise downloading the files from Hugging Face, as it has several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.

To check the authenticity and safety of the model, look for:

- Model cards with clear documentation
- A verified organization badge
- Community reviews and usage statistics

When available, make sure to verify the file checksum, a type of anti-tampering fingerprint. On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the file you downloaded. You can use tools like `sha256sum` on Linux and macOS, or `certutil -hashfile file SHA256` on Windows to generate the downloaded file's checksum.

A downloaded model is generally safe if they satisfy all of the above checks.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Model Security

When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. If you want to download other models, or use an AI client without their library, you should follow their official documentation.

We recommend downloading model files from Hugging Face, as it provides several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.

To check the authenticity and safety of the model, look for:

- Model cards with clear documentation
- A verified organization badge
- Community reviews and usage statistics
- Matching checksums[^1]
  - On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the file you downloaded.

A downloaded model is generally safe if they satisfy all of the above checks.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Model Security

When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. If you want to download other models, or use an AI client without their library, you should follow their official documentation.

We recommend downloading model files from Hugging Face, as it provides several features to verify that your download is genuine and safe to use.

To check the authenticity and safety of the model, look for:

- Model cards with clear documentation
- A verified organization badge
- Community reviews and usage statistics
- Matching checksums
  - On Hugging Face, you can find the hash by clicking on a model file and looking for the **Copy SHA256** button below it. You should compare this checksum with the one from the file you downloaded.

A downloaded model is generally safe if they satisfy all of the above checks.
```

Reviewer 3: Why did you remove the 'Safe' badge from Hugging Face. This seam pretty important.

Reviewer 2: Oh oops, that was a complete oversight by me. I just forgot to copy it here.

Reviewer 3: >When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there. If you want to download other models, or use an AI client without their library, you should follow their official documentation.

I think this is a bit unclear. Yes, you should follow their documentation on how to import models, but the point was to introduce when you should or should not "side-load" the models. I think this slightly tweaked version reflects this better.

When you have found an AI model of your liking, you should download it in a safe manner. When you use an AI client that maintains their own library of model files (such as [Ollama](#ollama) and [Llamafile](#llamafile)), you should download it from there.  But if you want to download models not present in their library, or use an AI client that doesn't maintain its library (such as [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp), you will need to take extra steps to ensure it's a safe and legit AI model.

Reviewer 2: Ah, thanks for the clarification. Yes, when I was reading your proposed revisions, I was confused by this part:

> If you want to download other models, or use an AI client without their library, you should follow **those steps**.

## AI chat clients

| Feature | [Kobold.cpp](#koboldcpp) | [Ollama](#ollama) | [Llamafile](#llamafile) |
|---------|------------|---------|-----------|
| GPU Support | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } |
| Image Generation | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
| Speech Recognition | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } |
| Auto-download Models | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Few models available |
| Custom Parameters | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-close:{ .pg-red } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } |

> | Multi-platform | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Size limitations on Windows |

Reviewer 3: Honestly I just put it for Llamafile because I am not 100% sure you can modify parameters, I think you can from what I remember, but I am not sure.

> | Multi-platform | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Size limitations on Windows |

Reviewer: Their documentation mentions external weights:

>Even though our example llamafiles have the weights built-in, you don't have to use llamafile that way. Instead, you can download just the llamafile software (without any weights included) from our releases page. You can then use it alongside any external weights you may have on hand.

Is that the same thing?

> | Multi-platform | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-check:{ .pg-green } | :material-alert-outline:{ .pg-orange } Size limitations on Windows |

Reviewer: They let you edit parameters in their interface.

</div>

## Criteria

Please note we are not affiliated with any of the projects we recommend. In addition to [our standard criteria](about/criteria.md), we have developed a clear set of requirements to allow us to provide objective recommendations. We suggest you familiarize yourself with this list before choosing to use a project and conduct your own research to ensure it's the right choice for you.

### Minimum Requirements

- Must be open-source.
- Must not send personal data, including chat data.
- Must be available on Linux.
- Must not require a GPU.
- Must have support for GPU-powered fast inference.
- Must not require an internet connection.

### Best-Case

Our best-case criteria represent what we *would* like to see from the perfect project in this category. Our recommendations may not include any or all of this functionality, but those which do may rank higher than others on this page.

- Should be multi-platform.
- Should be easy to download and set up, such as having a one-click install process.
- Should have a built-in model downloader option.

> - Should be customizable (the user can modify the LLM paramaters, such as its system prompt or its temperature).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Should be customizable (the user can modify the LLM paramaters, such as its system prompt or its temperature).

[^1]: A file checksum is a type of anti-tampering fingerprint. A developer usually provides a checksum in a text file that can be downloaded separately, or on the download page itself. Verifying that the checksum of the file you downloaded matches the one provided by the developer helps ensure that the file is genuine and wasn't tampered with in transit. You can use commands like `sha256sum` on Linux and macOS, or `certutil -hashfile file SHA256` on Windows to generate the downloaded file's checksum.
```

Reviewer 2: Companion to https://github.com/privacyguides/privacyguides.org/pull/2810#discussion_r1838925870
